their strong points and their assets. So I began to
write things for them. And the first March I wrote
for them, Vern was still there, that old men of
Kyle, which they've been still been playing that
now for 27 years. And they, they, everywhere they
go, they play it. And so then I could see that since
it was predominantly brass, that the woodwinds
were just, just filling the hole really. so we
began to really expound on that a lot and really the
sound became almost unique because uh and the
first i wanted them to go over to the sidelines and
halt and play right in front of the people so they
could see how good they were well this had never
been done they did not want to do it but i was
established pretty good by then, and the drum
major I had, I said, this is the guy that I think we
can do it with. So I wrote a medley of tunes called
the Blue Gray Medley, which they played up until
just a few years ago. And it had Yellow Rose of
Texas, and it had the Bonnie Blue Flag. I wrote that
for Travis Bryan, because that's his favorite
song in this world. and then it had Dixie, which
they let us play, and then it had the Battle Hymn of
the Republic. And it was just for us and nobody
else. So anyway, I talked to him, and he said, well,
sir, I'll go. I said, I want you to go talk to the drum
major now and see what they think about it, and then
I want you to come back and let's all get together
and see what you think. Well, so they came in there.
Well, sir, we never have done that before. I said,
well, do you see anything wrong with it, why we
shouldn't do it? And they said, well, no, sir, I
don't see any reason why we shouldn't do it. I said,
well, do you like the way the band sounds now? Do you
think we've come a long way with their sound? And
they said, well, yes, sir, we have. And I said,
well, I'll tell you what I'll do. I want you to try
this one time. And if they don't throw programs in
the air and throw hats around and you don't get a
roaring standing ovation, Well, then I'll never
ask you to do it again. And old Brad Harrison, he
said, well, that's fair enough. So we marched him.
And when he came, well, then we flanked over right
over the sideline, man. And it was about the time we
got to that battle at the end of the public. I get
goose pimples every time I think about it. And boy,
they blew the end. They'd never heard the Aggie
band like that before, ever. And they blew the ends
out of those horns. And it was really a major
accomplishment for us. And they threw programs
and hats. We got letters from all over everywhere.
So then they came in and they apologized. And I've
got a letter in my scrapbook in there from this same
drum major. And they've been doing it ever since.
But you've got to get right under the mouth of the
gun sometime and really just really let them know
that we play as well as the, because see the Texas
band, the Texas Tech band, they all come over and
play all the time. So we're marching down the field
constantly. And all our sound is going that way.
And then coming back it's going that way. And
nobody really knows, if you don't do something
like that, just how good that band really is. So,
boy, they said, well, we can go over to the side and
we can do this. And it really made a difference. I
think it made a... That's one of the first things we
really did that started us on the way to expand
our... our musical talents. So anyway, then the
band seemed to get so popular that everybody
wanted them somewhere. This happened in about
the, we'd have our standard things we'd go to, you
know. and we'd go to 12 football games and we'd go to
12 basketball games we'd go to the six reviews and
we'd go to the uh battle flowers parade and maybe
one other and then that that was it for the year And
then all of a sudden they started, all these people
wanted them to come, the Fat Stock Show, and they
wanted them to come to the Mardi Gras, and they
wanted them to come to the sailing, what did they
call that, the sailing of the fleet down at Corpus.
So then I changed the military setup mainly to get
rid of them. lot of the guys got to be seniors and
they didn't have any rank at all and they didn't so
we we divided the band and made a brigade out of the
band we had over 300 every year and we divided it
into into two two units which gave these other
seniors an opportunity to be officers, twice as
many. And that seemed to help more than anything
else we did. And this really, we could call it the
maroon band and the white band or whatever you want
to call it, but it had two battalions instead of
one. of these various trips, year after year after
year, which one was your favorite, most
enjoyable? Well, you know, we had so many. We
started going when Jackie Sherrill came, but he
wanted us to go everywhere he went. And Jackie
Sherrill was here, I think, six or eight years. We
missed two football games. Two. And one of them was
in southern Mississippi and the other was
Alabama. It was just not feasible for us to go to
either one of them at the time and everything. And I
think they're doing about the same now. And Jackie
was very, very helpful. And it would be very
difficult for me to say which one was the best. I
think the trip we made to the Meadowland for the
Kickoff Classic was one of the notable ones when
Jackie was here. And then of course the inaugural
parade for President Bush, that was a wonderful
trip.
We flew, we'd go to Arkansas every year. Those were
not so memorable, and LSU, but the last year I was
here we went out of state five times. Now the
funding for those trips came from what source? I
wanted them to set up a budget for it, but they
didn't do it. It was just, you know, if the Board of
Regents decided we wanted to go somewhere, they'd
say, okay, yeah, they'll be there. Well, where are
we going to get the money? Oh, well, let's see,
so-and-so will give $25, you'll give $50, you'll
give $50. And then when it comes time to giving the
money, they wouldn't give it. And it always
prolonged everything, but they would raise the
money. Now Jackie went to see the former students,
Randy Mattson. And Randy and Jackie made a deal
that they were going to give $25,000 every year so
The $25,000 would go to the Texas trip one year, the
Arkansas trip the next year. And then when we'd
fly, man, that cost a fortune. We spent $300,000
that last year. I was there just on trips. And maybe
more. I'd go in there and ask for a couple of bass
horns and piccolos and say you know we don't have
any money. You know how that goes. But anyway, and
they've been going and it's much more now than it
was then. So they've been really traveling now. I
would think that the Meadowlands, or that we
played the Kickoff Classic, or the Inaugural
Parade, General Darling went with us up there, and
we just had a lot of fun. Was there any of the kind of
regular trips you made that were more difficult to
deal with than the others? Yeah, when I first came
here, Everywhere we went, we had to go on bus. We
played in the Hall of Fame Bowl in Virginia, I
believe. We had to get on a bus, ride all night long,
and then play the game, get on the bus, and come
back. And we used to do the same thing at Texas Tech.
So I had about all, I'd go in, and I'd say, man, I'll
tell you what, now this is no, and everybody else,
man, they'd get buses and overnight, but we
couldn't stay overnight. but so I go in and talk to
General Simpson about it and he agreed and then
John agreed so then on the big trips like Tech,
Arkansas, LSU, any of those then they started
letting us spend the night and if we had to go out of
state like we went to the Sun Bowl when Emery
Ballard was there and we got to fly out there And
then we got, next thing we know, we got a little deal
that the athletic department agreed that anytime
we have to go out of state, we fly. And the athletic
department was just absolutely marvelous to me
and to the band. So they helped fund that? They
helped. You know, they started asking for
donations at the first Cotton Bowl we went to, and
they got a whole bunch the first year. I don't know
what they're getting now, and they got a whole
bunch the second year. And they paid for an awful
lot of stuff. During your years, are there any
donors that deserve special appreciation? Well,
we didn't have many donors, really. We didn't have
any scholarships. And they offered us a couple.
The son, Ross, came to me and said they wanted to
give a couple scholarships. And I said, well, I'll
talk it over with the officers in the band. And you
know, this sounds kind of silly, but this is true.
And we had the COs in there, and we had the drum
major. And we talked about it and talked about it.
And I said, then we had to decide who's going to get
it and how they're going to get it. So they talked it
over and came back in and said, we don't want any
scholarships. He said, who's going to get it?
Who's better than I am? Who's better than he is? I
mean that's just the way they were. And I think
there's a big difference in the,
I don't say the attitude, but the way things were
run then and now. That was definitely an old army
back in those days, and it's not that way now. In
your years, organizationally, you reported
directly to John Colas? General Simpson. I did the
first year to John Colas, and then General Simpson
came in, and so he was my boss up until... He
retired, then Howard Perry was my boss. And then
the last three or four years there, General
Darling was my boss. And they moved us into the
Corps entirely. And so General Darling was my
boss. And I can truthfully say that he's one of the
nicest, finest gentlemen I believe I've ever
known. And I really do have a lot of admiration for
him. And we, you know, so see, I wouldn't
actually... connected with or responsible to the
military people over there they wish I was but I
wasn't and so that's the setup we had and so then you
know they would have to I wanted them to set up a
budget for our travels and they never would. And so
I said well it just made it real hard for us to
function on our budget because what they did was go
ahead and spend our money and then we couldn't go
over there and even get money for our requisitions
or anything. But anyway it worked I guess. You came
as the, your title was assistant or associate
director? Associate director. I was the first one
they had. And you did that for one year. And then I
became the director in 73. I was here in 72 as
associate director. Describe in those years the
process of how a youngster became a member of the
Aggie band. How did they? Okay, the first thing, we
sent out information to almost every high school
in the state about the band. And then mostly, all of
the guys in the band would go to their hometown They
would go see the principal. They would set up a
night of recruiting in their own high school and
take movies and show and have information, answer
all the questions about the band. Then they would
write to me. And I would, we'd go back and forth. And
then they would have these conferences. The
individual prospect. Yes, yes. Then they would
have these conferences. And we would sign these
people up. And although there was no formal
audition, they had to see, to see me or my, one of my
assistants and get, go through the conference and
fill out this sheet. And then, you know, if you had a
first chair, all state player from spring and
well, he's not going to sit down and play the third
part, you know how good he is. And so we, you know,
the core was getting smaller. And then we had our
our recruiting was not near as good in the last four
five six years although we we stayed right around
300 uh the most we ever had was 358 and now there's
core developments you know i think they give 250
scholarships a year and they're up to 400. well see
we didn't have any of that yeah and it was tough
during those years which instruments Generally
were you, did you have a large number of prospects
and for which instruments a few? You usually had
all of the bass horns you wanted. We would have 34,
from 33 to 36, 38 bass horns every year. One year we
had 76 trombones. One year we had 94 trumpets. But
you take your general instrumentation in those
days, and this was, it's just amazing how every
year it was about like this. You start with your
flutes, you'd have two, maybe, piccolos, maybe
10, 12 clarinets. And then you go to your
saxophones, you'd have 40 alto saxophones, you'd
have 40 tenors, somewhere in the neighborhood of
40 tenors. 25 French horns, then trombones 60 to
70, baritone horns 20, 25, trumpets probably 65 to
85, and predominantly brass. What about
percussion? Oh yeah, no problem with percussion.
We'd always, we marched, they used to have three
bass drums, And I always felt like the bass drums,
you should just see them and know they're there.
It's not a bass drum solo. So they'd get pretty hot
sometime about that, but I insisted. They thought
they were the reason that the band was staying
together, so they're going to wear out a bass drum
beater every week. That's not right. So we'd have
two rows of percussion, which was 24. We'd have two
set of cymbals and two bass drums. So when they
divided up, there'd be one on each. And usually
that's the way it worked out. But you know
generally speaking that was, it was all brass. So I
gave, I let the clarinet parts play, clarinets
would play trumpet parts, because unless you were
starting strides you'd have your piccolos. Some
of you would get a real good piccolo player but you
know and then we took in the girls and well that was a
five year deal. Let's talk about that in a minute.
Were there any bands that were unusually
productive, any high school bands, of Aggie band
members? Yeah, we got a lot of them from Houston.
Well, most of the Houston schools would get a lot of
them from Spring and Memorial, and they were the
best ones usually as far as the instruments are
concerned. You get a lot from over in East Texas,
you get a lot of Longview, Piler, Pine Tree,
Lufkin. and get quite a few from Dallas. Then out
west Texas, sometimes we get one from El Paso and
Abilene and that. But they, and San Antonio, we get
a lot from San Antonio down there. MacArthur
was the main one. They seem like we got a lot of them
from MacArthur. But the large schools usually we
got a bunch of them. Do you have any anecdotes you
could share about someone trying to twist your arm
to be sure that a certain youngster got in a band?
Oh, well, of course,
most of those folks think that if they had a child
that was really a nice boy and he was really a good
boy, that if I wanted him in the band I could get him
in the band. That's not so. They had to have, they
were interested in academic accomplishments or
you don't get in. Of course that's what I'd try to
tell them and they still didn't believe it. So most
of the guys you know that came in there had IQs, SAT
scores were at 1150. But you'd get some time, you'd
have four or five. I remember one time in Conroe,
four or five guys came in there and sat down, all of
them nice looking boys. And I said, well, what do
you play? I play trumpet, sir. I was all regional. I
play trombone all state. And then, so what do you
play? Sir, I'm percussion. I'm an all state
percussion player. So I said, last one, what do you
play? Sir, I don't play anything. And they said,
sir, this is kind of a deal. Said, if we get these
four in, we'd like to get him in. And I said, well, we
don't have anybody. And they had about 30 in the
band when I came, but didn't play anything. So I
said, we don't do that now. You play something if
you're going to be in the band. And so they looked
and said, well, sir, we kind of plan on all being
together. I said, well, what would you like to
play? And he would say, I don't know. You want to
play anything? If you're going to be in the band,
you've got to play a horn. What's the easiest? I
said, well, saxophone, percussion. I said, would
you be willing to learn how to play? And we'd have
about four or five of these every year. He said,
yes, sir, I would. I'd like to do that. I said, OK, I
will arrange it for you to have a private lesson a
week until you can play. And then you will be
allowed to march. And Jay, see he was trying to get
his music degree and I'd stick him on Jay and he'd
teach him. And so therefore we didn't have anybody
that did not play. Now the degree of
accomplishment was sometimes not as great as
others, but I had one of the CO in the band came from
over here at Lafayette, Louisiana and that
rascal, he'd never played in his life and he picked
the flute. And he was first chair in the flute in the
concert band when he left. I mean, he was good. He
played the start of the piccolo, you know. And
that's the kind they were. And that's what they
learned. Saxophone is real easy. You just have to
punch a star below. And, you know, in six weeks'
time, you can play a saxophone and play most of the
parts. It's an easy part to play, too. So anyway,
that's the way we managed it. And a lot of the
mothers would call and say, well, my son's off
state, and he did this, and he did that, and he did
that. I said, what's his SAT score? She said, well,
it's 1150. I said, you won't have any trouble.
How'd he finish in his class? I believe he was six or
seven. You just come right on. I don't think you'll
have any trouble at all. But then on the other hand,
you get a good one, and they said, well, it's about
700. I said, I don't think he can get in. And that's
true. In your years, when did the fall season begin
for the Aggie band? It started during Corps
Orientation Week. and they would have just the
freshmen and that's usually the about the last
week in August except if we had to do something real
special like an early football game well then then
we could sometime they let us come in early but see
they didn't want to come in early because they had
to pay for their rooms in the dorm and nobody wanted
to pay for it So that's why we couldn't do a lot of
this. Like when we went to Meadowlands, they came a
week early. But we'd take just the freshmen that
week. We'd teach them all the basic steps, left
face, right face, the rear march, and how to march
65. We'd teach them two or three simple little
drills, and all week long, two hours a day, I'd be
right there, and the drum majors would be there,
and that's what we did with them. So they worked out
only, they marched, practiced marching two hours
a day. That first orientation week. Were they also
practicing instrumentally in addition? No, they
were not. We just didn't have time. See they were
also going to all the other choral classes and they
were getting orientated on their English and
their history and they were signing up and they
were registering. It was a wonderful thing
because they were a week ahead.
Then we wouldn't let the sophomores come. Boy,
they were tough. It was tough. We wouldn't let them
mess with them until the following week. Only a
select few were there to stay with them. And they
tried to make it as pleasant as possible. And then
it's just an absolutely amazing the following
week when they got there, most of them could go
right in there. They looked like they marched in.
Most of them had been doing that stuff, you know. I
don't know how they did it, but they did. We'd get
them out there on that drill field, and we'd work
them. They'd have plenty of ice water out there.
They'd get hot, go get under the shade, blah, blah,
blah. And that was really a good thing, I can tell
you. They're still doing it, too. Now, the drill
field in those days for the band was south of
Duncan? It's right there. Yeah, right the way it is
now. Yeah, yeah.
And what time of day was that, two hours? Five
o'clock. Oh, you mean for them? Usually it would
be, we'd get an hour probably in the morning and
then an hour in the afternoon. But we couldn't have
but one hour. And now I looked at the schedule. I was
up there the other day and Jay told me the schedule.
They're going to get them all week. They're going
to get to play and that's all they're going to do.
Well, that's wonderful, man. We just didn't have
that luxury in those days. You know, everybody
thought we got too much time and attention anyway,
and we just didn't get it. Now, when classes
started, what was the routine then? Okay, they go
to their classes, and we have it. We have one hour a
day, 5 o'clock. It was from 5 to 6. And we had every
one of those guys registered as a P class from five
to six. As the time went on and it got so crowded we
couldn't get them all in but we got most of them in.
And then from four to five those that did not have
classes would come in the band hall and we'd have a
section rehearsal, get all the music straight. go
over all the points. By then I'd have all the music
worked out by the step as to how many steps in the
drill and where to end it in the music. You can do
that just an absolute step if you just work at it.
And it was really quite a deal. We didn't have but an
hour and And I said, man, we got to practice
smarter, not harder. We got to do every square
minute of this has got to be learning something.
And, you know, it takes them. So we'd go the first
two days without music, just the percussion, and
we'd walk through the drill. We'd get that down
pretty good. And then on Wednesday, we'd put it
with the music. And that was just, I hated
Wednesdays. Because they couldn't, you know,
they had to remember it. But anyway, usually by
Friday it was worked out pretty good and it was
pretty solid. And then we'd go Friday afternoon,
we'd get to practice down at the field because that
was, it was on astroturf then. And we'd go down
there early and have a little yell practice for the
football team. They finished at five. And we went
on at five. And normally when you went on the road,
you also practiced on their field on a farm? Well,
not much. Oh, really? No. Occasionally we would if
we needed it, but we didn't do that. Most of them
that came down here practiced on ours. but we just
go go do it and mainly because of the time factor and
when we went to Fort Worth or to two places we'd go
we'd have that corporate you know we didn't have
time to practice on that now you you were the
primary planner of the halftime routine I did I
have one of them All right. And you would then share
that first with what, would it be the Corps
leaders? Well, the first thing we did, we had a, I
had a draftsman make me a simulated football field
on a piece of paper. I'll show you one if you want to
see it. And it had it all marked off in five yards and
all the yard lines. So I would draw the drills on
that paper. Have you ever seen one of them? And I'll
show you the one we'll drill. That's something.
And so then I would have the drum majors into my
office usually
Either in the middle of about an hour before the
drill or early in the morning if they couldn't come
then, and I would give them their drill. On Monday?
On Monday. And if we played Texas on Thursday, we'd
practice on Sunday. They'd get it on Sunday. And we
would go over it step by step, and I would show them,
okay, we'll do this and we'll do that. Now here's a
three-step counter march right here. You know
what that is. We'd do a black here to get over there,
and then you've got a cheetah step here. And you had
to do all that stuff or it wouldn't come out even. So
then they would go out there, and they would walk
through it with the bugle ranks. And the first,
usually the first part of them company fronts, you
couldn't do that. They wouldn't have, but then the
rest of it, they could march through it. And then
they had a pretty good idea of what was going to work
by the time they got there. And then they'd gather
around, they'd explain it to the band. Of course,
the bugle rank then knew it. They all got drills
too. So you'd do 12 for them, three for the drum
majors, and three for the band directors. Every
week we'd do that. And so that's the way it all
worked out. And we just didn't have time to clobber
around, point everything out. usually when they
got out there and most of them were afraid not to do
it right I think and they just did better than they
know how sometimes now uh normally the routine is
how long was how long the southwest conference
rules stated that you could have eight minutes on
and off the field now there's some schools that
don't abide by that Texas is on there usually every
time 10 to 11 minutes. But you're supposed to be on
and off in 16 minutes, both fans, so the football
teams then will have four minutes to get. But
usually it goes right up. Now a lot of that
sometimes you know you can't do it because
there'll be people hanging around on the field,
they can't get them off, so you get two or three
minutes off your schedule, the teams might take a
long time getting off, and it's really kind of
difficult. But eight was your target? Eight
minutes was your, and you go on longer than that,
you've lost your audience anyway. Right, then the
opening routine in the north end zone for the
inning band and the final block tee. When you step
off the field, it's supposed to be done in eight
minutes. Right, but I was going to ask, how much
time was there between when they first stepped on
the field at the end, after the bugle call, until
they started? playing in the block T, was that down
to about six minutes? Well I did it a lot quicker
than that. Because I told them, we don't want a
minute of you saying recall, step off on . That's
right. And we don't want to waste all this time
there. And also, we can't waste a minute on a bugle
flourish, bugle rack flourish. Unless we didn't
have that much drill or something. So you've got to
do this quickly. Because we are timed. and said, I
really do not care what the other people do. We are
going to be on and off, and if we can't get on, if
we're not off in eight minutes, it's not going to be
15 seconds longer than that.